Early Artemis Missions
With the powerful Space Launch System (SLS) rocket and Orion spacecraft nearing the end of
testing and development, the agency has the foundation needed to send humans back to lunar orbit.
In preparation for the safest earliest possible lunar landing, NASA seeks to make full use of early
Artemis missions through additional testing for Orion and the Human Landing System (HLS) when
possible.
The Gateway is a critical component of the agency’s sustainable lunar operations. NASA will
integrate the first two pieces on Earth, launching the Power and Propulsion Element (PPE) and
the Habitation and Logistics Outpost (HALO) together in 2023 on a single rocket, followed by a
commercial logistics supply launch.
In 2024, Orion will deliver its crew to lunar orbit. The commercially developed lander that will take
the crew to the lunar surface will be capable of docking directly to Orion for crew transfer for early
Artemis missions, but NASA is maintaining flexibility for optional docking to the Gateway. On the
surface, the crew will wear the new exploration extravehicular mobility unit or xEMU spacesuit as
they explore the surface for about a week before returning to Orion for the trip home to Earth.
Sustainable Artemis Missions
On later Artemis missions crew will arrive at the Gateway aboard Orion. On the Gateway, they
will be able to conduct research and take trips down to the surface. NASA will work with Artemis
providers to ensure spacecraft are built to international interoperability standards with as many
reusable components as possible for long-term sustainability at the Moon.
Long-standing International Space Station partners are eager to join NASA in lunar orbit. The
Canadian Space Agency (CSA) has committed to providing advanced robotics for the Gateway, and
ESA (European Space Agency) plans to provide the International Habitat (IHab) and the ESPRIT
module, which will deliver additional communications capabilities, a science airlock for deploying
science payloads and CubeSats, and refueling of the Gateway. The Japan Aerospace Exploration
Agency (JAXA) plans to contribute habitation components and logistics resupply. The Russian
Space Agency (Roscosmos) has expressed interest in cooperation on Gateway as well.
At the lunar South Pole, NASA and its partners will develop an Artemis Base Camp to support
longer expeditions on the lunar surface. Planned Base Camp elements include a lunar terrain vehicle
(LTV, or unpressurized rover), a habitable mobility platform (pressurized rover), a lunar foundation
habitation module, power systems, ad in-situ resource utilization systems.
This incremental build-up of capabilities on and around the Moon is essential to establishing long-
term exploration of Earth’s nearest neighbor and preparing for human exploration of Mars.
10
Chapter 1: Setting Humanity on a Sustainable Course
to the Moon
The Artemis program builds on a half-century of experience and preparation to establish a robust
human-robotic presence on and around the Moon. With clear direction from the White House,
coordination among the reestablished National Space Council, strong bipartisan support in
Congress, and robust participation from industry and international partnerships, Artemis is a
globally unifying endeavor.
America will lead the monumental shift that frees humanity from our innate bonds to Earth. This is
the decade in which the Artemis Generation will teach us how to live on other worlds.
The Basis for a Lunar Architecture
NASA was ready for Space Policy Directive-1, the call from the President to return to the Moon
and get ready for Mars, and was already prepared to offer architectural and hardware solutions to
leverage the core deep space transportation systems—the SLS rocket, the Orion spacecraft, and the
supporting Exploration Ground Systems (EGS)—to return humans to the Moon for the first time in
more than 50 years.
Through partnerships with U.S. industry, NASA was already developing 21st century deep space
habitation capabilities and investing in lunar lander technologies. Ongoing spacesuit upgrades
have resulted in a lunar surface suit that affords more frequent spacewalks through improved
safety features, custom fitting, simplified maintenance, and better communications. A cross-agency
11
SCIENCE
Initial investigations delivered
by CLPS providers will
study the lunar surface and
resources at the lunar poles.
NASA originally selected
nine CLPS providers, but as
the need to deliver heavier
payloads became apparent,
the agency later added five
more companies.
In May 2019, NASA awarded
the first two task awards for
12 instrument deliveries to
Astrobotic (Pittsburgh, PA) and
Intuitive Machines (Houston,
TX). Those initial flights are
launching in 2021, and NASA
is planning for two deliveries
per year thereafter.
architecture team also had been formulating plans for a Gateway orbiting the Moon. This plan
garnered significant support from international partners and was reflected in the Global Exploration
Roadmap as a collaborative effort that would “open the space frontier for human exploration of the
Moon, Mars and asteroids as we expand human exploration and commerce into deep space.”
In 2018, with support from the highest-level national decision makers, NASA proposed a plan to
return humans to the lunar surface by 2028. This plan included the Gateway from which human
landers could be deployed. There was strong international support for the orbiting lunar outpost,
and International Space Station partners proposed additional capabilities they could contribute.
The Gateway program advanced from formulation to program status in late 2018.
NASA also established the Commercial Lunar Payload Services or
CLPS initiative in 2018, encouraging the U.S. commercial space
industry to introduce new lander technologies to deliver NASA
and commercial payloads to the surface of the Moon.
With 14 CLPS providers currently on contract and eligible to bid
on payload deliveries to the Moon, NASA solicits bids from the
companies as needed and awards surface task orders for lunar
surface deliveries. The agency has already awarded multiple
deliveries and assigned payloads to flights in 2021 as well as the
first of two planned deliveries slated for 2022. A task order was
awarded in June 2020 to Astrobotic of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
to deliver NASA’s Volatiles Investigating Polar Exploration Rover
or VIPER in 2023. The agency plans to send science instruments
and technology experiments to the surface at least twice per year
on CLPS flights.
NASA has already selected more than two dozen instruments
to study the Moon and test new technologies for these early
CLPS flights, including VIPER. The agency also has announced a new process to build an internal
database of future lunar surface investigations. Through the Payloads and Research Investigations
on the Surface of the Moon or PRISM, NASA is interested in investigations that maximize basic
and applied science and technology demonstrations at different lunar locations, as well as
individual investigation components that would be valuable at multiple locations. The agency will
use the PRISM information to inform the manifests of future CLPS deliveries beginning in 2023.
The agency will periodically open up PRISM requests for information to collect new ideas and
investigations eligible for future CLPS flight opportunities.
Meanwhile in 2018, NASA began the acquisition process for commercially provided Human
Landing Systems (HLS) to meet the goal of sending humans back to the Moon. By harnessing new
technologies and spurring competitive innovation, NASA will work with commercial partners to
12
design and develop an HLS capable of accessing any part of the Moon and reusing sections of the
system to increase affordability.
The team issued a Broad Agency Announcement (BAA) (NextSTEP Appendix E) to U.S. industry,
seeking HLS studies, risk reduction, development, and demonstration. Proposals were due March
25, 2019, one day before Vice President Pence issued a new challenge to NASA: land the first woman
and next man on the Moon by 2024—four years earlier than originally planned. NASA moved
quickly to respond to the Vice President’s challenge.
By May 2019, NASA had selected 11 companies across eight states under NextSTEP Appendix E
to conduct studies and produce system-level prototypes to reduce risk and advance human lander
technologies. Appendix E immediately allowed NASA to engage with commercial industry on early
designs and how to best set up a rapid development approach to meet the 2024 objectives.
In response to the new, accelerated charge to the Moon, the agency issued a draft solicitation
(NextSTEP Appendix H) in July 2019, this time seeking feedback on the development and
demonstration of an integrated HLS to deliver humans to the lunar surface by 2024 and for the
development and demonstration of a more sustainable HLS by 2026. Following a second draft
in August and after addressing more than 1,150 comments, the final Appendix H solicitation was
issued in October 2019. Awards were made to three companies in spring 2020.